निशमय्य तवाथ यानवार्तां भृशमार्ता: पशुपालबालिकास्ता: ।
किमिदं किमिदं कथं न्वितीमा: समवेता: परिदेवितान्यकुर्वन् ॥१॥
निशमय्य	hearing
तव-अथ	(of) Thy, then
यान-वार्ताम्	departure news
भृशम्-आर्ता:	very much saddened
पशुपाल-बालिका:-ता:	the cowherd girls, they
किम्-इदं किम्-इदं	what is this, what is this
कथं नु-इति-	how is this, thus
इमा: समवेता:	these (girls) gathered
परिदेवितानि-	lamentations
अकुर्वन्	doing
Then hearing the news of Thy impending departure the cowherd girls were very much saddened. They gathered together and lamented saying -'What is this? How and why is this happening?'
करुणानिधिरेष नन्दसूनु: कथमस्मान् विसृजेदनन्यनाथा: ।
बत न: किमु दैवमेवमासीदिति तास्त्वद्गतमानसा विलेपु: ॥२॥
करुणा-निधि:-	the compassion repository
एष नन्द-सूनु:	this Nanda's son
कथम्-अस्मान्-	how come us
विसृजेत्-अनन्यनाथा:	forsake, who do not have any other support
बत न: किमु	Alas our what
दैवम्-एवम्-आसीत्-	fate of this kind was
इति ता:-	thus they
त्वत्-गत-मानसा	in Thee fixed hearted
विलेपु:	bemoaned
The abode of compassion, Nanda's son, Krishna, how can he forsake us, who have no other support, except him. Alas what kind of fate do we have.' The girls with their hearts fixed on Thee bemoaned.
चरमप्रहरे प्रतिष्ठमान: सह पित्रा निजमित्रमण्डलैश्च ।
परितापभरं नितम्बिनीनां शमयिष्यन् व्यमुच: सखायमेकम् ॥३॥
चरम-प्रहरे	in the last part (of night)
प्रतिष्ठमान:	leaving
सह पित्रा	with (Thy) father
निज-मित्र-मण्डलै:-च	and with his friends' groups
परिताप-भरं	of the sorrowful
नितम्बिनीनां	beauties (Gopikas)
शमयिष्यन्	to assuage
व्यमुच:	sent
सखायम्-एकम्	one friend
Thou were to leave with Thy father and a group of his friends in the last lap of the night. Thou sent one of Thy companions to the beautiful Gopikas who were very sorrowful, to assuage their grief.
अचिरादुपयामि सन्निधिं वो भविता साधु मयैव सङ्गमश्री: ।
अमृताम्बुनिधौ निमज्जयिष्ये द्रुतमित्याश्वसिता वधूरकार्षी: ॥४॥
अचिरात्-उपयामि	very soon (I) will come back
सन्निधिं व:	near you all
भविता साधु	(and) will be good (many)
मया-एव	with me only
सङ्गम-श्री:	meetings happy
अमृत-अम्बुनिधौ	in the nectar ocean
निमज्जयिष्ये	I shall immerse you
द्रुतम्-इति-आश्वासिता:	soon, thus consolations
वधू:-अकार्षी:	to the girls did give
I shall come back near you very soon. You will have many good and happy meetings with me. I will soon immerse you in the nectar of bliss ocean.' Thus Thou gave consolations to the girls.
सविषादभरं सयाच्ञमुच्चै: अतिदूरं वनिताभिरीक्ष्यमाण: ।
मृदु तद्दिशि पातयन्नपाङ्गान् सबलोऽक्रूररथेन निर्गतोऽभू: ॥५॥
सविषादभरं	with great sorrow
सयाच्ञम्-	begging
उच्चै:-अतिदूरम्	loudly till far
वनिताभि:-	by the women's
ईक्ष्यमाण:	following glances
मृदु तत्-दिशि	gently in that direction
पातयन्-	casting
अपाङ्गान्	sidelong glances
सबल:-	with Balaraama
अक्रूर-रथेन	in Akrura's chariot
निर्गत:-अभू:	departed
The women followed Thee till far loudly and piteously begging and gazing with entreating eyes. Thou cast soft sidelong glances in that direction and departed with Balaraama in Akrura's chariot.
अनसा बहुलेन वल्लवानां मनसा चानुगतोऽथ वल्लभानाम् ।
वनमार्तमृगं विषण्णवृक्षं समतीतो यमुनातटीमयासी: ॥६॥
अनसा बहुलेन	by carts many
वल्लवानां मनसा	(and) by the Gopikaa's minds
च-अनुगत:-अथ	being followed then
वल्लभानाम्	by the Gopas
वनम्-आर्तमृगम्	the forests with the sorrowful animals
विषण्ण-वृक्षम्	and the sad trees
समतीत:	crossed
यमुना-तटीम्-	and the banks of Yamunaa
अयासी:	reached
Many carts with Gopas followed Thee as also the minds and thoughts of the Gopikas. Thou crossed the forest with sorrowful animals and sad trees and reached the banks of the Yamunaa river.
नियमाय निमज्य वारिणि त्वामभिवीक्ष्याथ रथेऽपि गान्दिनेय: ।
विवशोऽजनि किं न्विदं विभोस्ते ननु चित्रं त्ववलोकनं समन्तात् ॥७॥
नियमाय निमज्य	for (the daily) duties bathing
वारिणि त्वाम्	in the waters (of Jamunaa), Thee
अभिवीक्ष्य-अथ	seeing then
रथे-अपि	on the chariot also
गान्दिनेय:	Gaandinee (Akrura)
विवश:-अजनि	helpless became
किम् नु-इदम्	what indeed is this
विभो:-ते	O Lord Thy
ननु चित्रं तु-	indeed wonder but
अवलोकनम्	being seen
समन्तात्	from everywhere
Akrura, the son of Gaandini was bathing in the waters of the river to perform his daily duties. He saw Thee in the water and also saw Thee on the chariot. He was overwhelmed with wonder and became helpless as to what it all was. But is there any wonder in Thy being seen from everywhere as Thou are omnipresent!
पुनरेष निमज्य पुण्यशाली पुरुषं त्वां परमं भुजङ्गभोगे ।
अरिकम्बुगदाम्बुजै: स्फुरन्तं सुरसिद्धौघपरीतमालुलोके ॥८॥
पुन:-एष	again this (Akrura)
निमज्य	dipping (in the waters)
पुण्यशाली	(this) meritorious one,
पुरुषं त्वां परमं	Being Thee Supreme,
भुजङ्ग-भोगे	on the serpent's body
अरि-कम्बु-गदा-अम्बुजै:	with the discus, conch, mace and lotus
स्फुरन्तं	resplendent
सुर-सिद्ध-औघ-परीतं	by gods and siddhaas' groups surrounded
आलुलोके	(he) saw
Akrura again took a dip in the water. The meritorious and fortunate man that he was, he saw Thee The Supreme Being reclining on the Shesha serpent's body bed, resplendent and adorned with the discus, conch, mace and lotus. Thou were surrounded by groups of gods and various siddhaas.
स तदा परमात्मसौख्यसिन्धौ विनिमग्न: प्रणुवन् प्रकारभेदै: ।
अविलोक्य पुनश्च हर्षसिन्धोरनुवृत्त्या पुलकावृतो ययौ त्वाम् ॥९॥
स तदा	he then
परमात्म-सौख्य-सिन्धौ	in the supreme bliss ocean
विनिमग्न: प्रणुवन्	immersed (and) praising
प्रकार-भेदै:	in different ways (of Saguna and Nirguna)
अविलोक्य	not seeing Thee
पुन:-च	and again
हर्ष-सिन्धो:-	in the bliss ocean
अनुवृत्त्या	continuing to be
पुलक-आवृत:	with horripilation all over
ययौ त्वाम्	went to Thee
He was then immersed in the ocean of supreme bliss and sang the praises unto Thy Saguna and Nirguna forms. Even as Thy vision disappeared, he continued to experience the unlimited bliss and with horripilations all over his body, he went to Thee.
किमु शीतलिमा महान् जले यत् पुलकोऽसाविति चोदितेन तेन ।
अतिहर्षनिरुत्तरेण सार्धं रथवासी पवनेश पाहि मां त्वम् ॥१०॥
किमु शीतलिमा	is it cool
महान् जले यत्	very much in the water so that
पुलक:-असौ-	horripilation this
इति चोदितेन	thus asked
तेन अति-हर्ष-	(with) him (because of) extreme bliss
निरुत्तरेण	speechless
सार्धम् रथवासी	with (him, Akrura) seated on the chariot
पवनेश	O Lord of Guruvaayur
पाहि मां त्वम्	save me Thou
Thou asked him if the water was so cold that he had horripilation on his body, as if not knowing the cause. Akrura was speechless because he was immersed in extreme bliss. Thou sitting with him on the chariot, O Lord of Guruvaayur! Do save me.